Version Control System (VCS) is a tool used in software dev and collobaration to manage changes to source code over time. 

Features:
1. Tracks and records changes to codebase, manintaining a structured project history.
For example: Git allows developers to commit changes with descriptive messages, 
making it easier to understand the evolution of the codebase.

2. Allows multiple developers to work on the same codebase simultaneously without conflicts.
3. Developers access and update a centtral repository, where project files are stored. (e.g. GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket)
4. Enables teams to share updates, and revert to the previous versions of the code if needed.

Common VCS tools include Git, Subversion (SVN), Mercurial, and Perforce.

Components of VCS:
1. Repository: A central location where all project files and their history are stored.
2. Commit: A snapshot of changes made to the codebase, along with a descriptive message.
git commit -m "Added new feature to the application"
3. Branch: A separate line of development that allows developers to work on new features or bug fixes without affecting the main codebase.
git checkout -b new-feature-branch
4. Merging: The process of integrating changes from one branch into another, typically the main branch.
git merge new-feature-branch
5. Pull Request: A request to merge changes from one branch into another, often used for code review and collaboration.
6. Clone: Creating a local copy of a remote repository to work on it locally.
git clone <repository_url>
7. Push: Uploading local changes to a remote repository.
git push origin new-feature-branch
8. Pull: Fetching and integrating changes from a remote repository into the local repository.
git pull origin main
9. Revision: A specific version of the codebase, identified by a unique identifier (e.g. commit hash in Git).

Types of VCS:
1. Local VCS: A simple version control system that stores all versioned files in a local database on the developer's machine. (e.g. RCS, SCCS)
Characteristics:
No Internet or server dependency
Useful for Individual projects
Limited to single user environments

2. Centralized VCS: A version control system that relies on a central server to store all versioned files and manage access to them. (e.g. SVN, CVS)
Characteristics:
Centralized repository for all project files
Requires Internet or server access
Suitable for teams and collaborative projects
Provides better access control and security

Pros:
Enables collaboration among multiple developers through a central repository.
Provides a history of changes, allowing developers to track and revert to previous versions if needed.
Allows fine-grained access control and security for project files.

Cons:
Has a single point of failure, as the central server can become unavailable or corrupted.
If the central server goes down, developers can't collaborate or access the latest version of the codebase.

3. Distributed Version Control System: A version control system that allows each developer to have a complete copy of the repository, including its history. 
(e.g. Git, Mercurial)
Characteristics:
Each developer has a full copy of the repository, including its history.
No central server dependency, allowing for offline work and collaboration.
Suitable for large and distributed teams, as well as open-source projects.
Provides better performance and scalability compared to centralized VCS.

Multiple VCS Tools
1. Git: A widely used distributed version control system known for its speed, flexibility, and powerful branching and merging capabilities.
2. Subversion (SVN): A centralized version control system that is easy to use and provides good support for binary files, but lacks some of
 the advanced features of distributed VCS.
3. Mercurial: A distributed version control system that is similar to Git but is designed to be simpler and easier to use, with a focus on 
performance and scalability.
4. Perforce: A centralized version control system that is designed for large teams and enterprise environments, offering advanced features 
for handling large codebases and binary files.

Git Configuration
1. checking git version
    git --version 
2. Initializing a git repository
    cd <file path> 
    git init
3. Git Configuration
    git config --global user.name Kartik9548
    git config --global user.email kathuriakartik42@gmail.com
4. git add . -> adding all files from untracked to tracked
   git add Vcs.txt
5. git commit -m "message"